Keywoards: Geology,Analog,Moon,Mars,Extravehicular Activity,EVA

# Introduction

Analog simulations have a crucial role in preparing space agencies for
exploration of other celestial bodies. The main objective is to test
procedures, tools and equipment for future use in those cutting-edge
projects. As the Extravehicular Activity (EVA) is the most crucial part
of the mission, we need to put a lot of effort on communication,
timelines, checklists and astronaut training itself.

During the EVA simulations performed in the Eifel, Germany region, a set
of European Space Agency scientists and research collaborators have
tested human-robotic partnership, EVA procedures and schedules for
geological sampling of the sedimentary layers in a former volcanic
activity location. This activities are strictly correlated with the Moon
Village concept introduced by Johann-Dietrich Woerner, European Space
Agency Director General and Bernard Foing, ILEWG Executive director and
ESA Chief Scientist & Senior Exploration Officer [@ref18][@ref19].

# Context

## The Eifel and Moon geology

The simulation took place in the Eifel volcanic region in the vicinity
of Mendig, Germany. The place has been chosen because of past volcanic
activity and rich and yet easy to access sedimentary layers. The Eifel
is located in the West of Germany and is part of the Variscan Mountain
belt. The Eifel was an active volcanic area during the Tertiary and
Quaternary. This volcanic activity is believed to be the result of hot
mantle material rising which resulted in the Eifel hotspot [@ref13].
This volcanism shaped the landscape of the Eifel by the formation of
volcanic craters, volcanic tuff and lava streams. Even though it is
believed to be still active, the largest eruption occurred approximately
12.900 years ago, when an eruption resulted in the Laacher See volcanic
site [@ref14]. This eruption produced big amounts of pyroclastic
deposits near the eruption site, but also in thin ash layers that can be
found in sediments throughout Europe. This explosion formed a crater
which is now a lake called the Laacher See. The locations of EVAs were
near the Laacher See, next to the Wingertsbergwand, a well-known
outcrop. This area consists of thin layers of volcanic ash and pumice
that were formed during the aforementioned Laacher See eruption.

This site and the area of the Eifel were, besides several logistic
factors, chosen because of some geological similarities with the Moon.
The Moon is known for having volcanic deposits on its surface and
pyroclastic materials have been found in lunar samples [@ref15]. An
example of pyroclastic areas on the Moon is the Taurus-Littrow region,
which is the landing site for the Apollo 17. During the Apollo 17
mission pyroclastic rocks were sampled for dating because it was assumed
that the pyroclastic material from that region could be relatively young
and can therefore represent the presence of volcanic vents. Even though
the pyroclastic deposits were relatively old, 3.5 Ga, there is still an
interest in pyroclastic rocks on the Moon because they hold information
on the volcanic history of the Moon. Remote sensing data from a
high-spatial-resolution UV/VIS camera from the Moon has been obtained
during the Clementine mission and can be used for analysis of the
surface of the Moon [@ref16].

Similar analysis can be performed on the pumice during EVA missions
using a remotely controlled spectrometer. Simulation crew has identified
two distinct locations that were representative examples to test
human-robotic interactions together with geologic EVA procedures. Both
locations consisted of outcrops with pyroclastic deposits from the
Laacher See eruption. Professionally trained geologist had chosen
suitable place to conduct the analog mission before the rest of the crew
arrived at the location of the simulation.

# Campaign description

During the simulation, the crew has prepared three distinct
Extravehicular Activities. Each one of them had different objectives. To
demonstrate in situ resource utilisation possibilities, the crew has
performed research on growing cress on Eifel regolith simulant samples.
It was conducted in ESTEC Life Sciences laboratory after field studies.

## Materials and methods

### The spectrometer

The USB4000 (Ocean Optics) is a relatively small spectrometer that
measures in the UV/VIS spectrum. The size makes the spectrometer mobile
and suitable to use in the field and on a lander or a rover. However,
there are clear restrictions in using this spectrometer for analyses,
the first restriction being the fact that a UV/VIS spectrum gives very
restricted information about measured surface compared to an infrared
spectrum and the relatively high amount of noise and systematic effects
makes this spectrometer less suitable for precise measurements. The
spectrometer was installed on the ILEWG ExoGeoLab lander and controlled
remotely, see Figure 1. During the field campaign, sunlight was used as
light source for the spectroscopy measurements. However, a high
integration time of 4 to 6 seconds was necessary to reach a usable light
intensity. Because of the high integration time a measurement, 5 scans
to average were applied instead of 10 to 20 scans to average [@ref8].
The high integration time could have made the analyses more sensitive to
changes, such as weather changes. A dark spectrum was measured before
the EVA, which means that the dark spectrum could have changed slightly
when the analyses were done. The reference spectrum was measured using a
white surface on which the sample can be placed for sample analyses.
SpectraSuite has been used as the interface between the spectrometer and
the computer.

![ILEWG ExoGeoLab lander with remotely controlled USB4000 spectrometer
and rover.](img/figure01.png)

## Extravehicular Activities

### The first EVA

During the first EVA the main objective was to set-up a remote
controlled telescope, which was later used to identify interesting and
noteworthy objects. Before the first simulation, the analog astronaut
crew started to prepare for the EVA. In the meantime, the engineering
crew prepared the lander and remote controlled rover for deployment and
simulated descent and landing on the ground. During the first EVA crew
members’ tasks were to:

-   identify and take the contingency sample,

-   establish and test the radio communication with simple and complex
    commands,

-   map the vicinity of lander for possible radio communication
    problems,

-   photograph the location of the rover and nearby rock wall,

-   secure the lander,

-   check wireless connection of the computer systems between lander and
    habitat,

-   setup and calibrate the spectrometer analysis device,

-   photograph the soil and rock sampling location,

-   identify and sample the most interesting elements of the sedimentary
    layer,

-   photograph the rock to outcrop,

-   outcrop rock samples and collect in plastic bags, photograph and
    mark the bags,

-   test rover mobility near the landing site

-   deliver the rock samples using the rover to the spectrometry
    analysis device on lander,

-   conduct spectrometry analysis from the habitat using remote control.

![Two astronauts and the ILEWG ExoGeoLab lander during an analogue Moon
EVA.](img/figure02.png)

### The second EVA

The second EVA’s main objective was to secure lander’s access to power
using solar panels and to do geological field work. Moreover the team
had to:

-   investigate more in-depth details of the sedimentary layers,

-   photograph with high resolution camera the field of work,

-   outcrop and collect rock samples to marked bags,

-   identify more detailed location for future EVAs,

-   test the suit for ease of movements,

-   test psychological aspects of the EVA,

-   test an emergency procedure for EVA termination because of solar
    flare coming and loss of communication.

### The third EVA

The third EVA’s main objective was to test rover capability to perform
tasks in extremely rough terrain and for the astronaut Biologist to take
a ground sample to identify signs of life. This EVA has been performed
in dim light conditions with limited visibility. Tasks for the EVA crew
were to:

-   test the rover movement capabilities in rough terrain,

-   identify and collect biological samples for further analysis,

-   test the rover lights,

-   test rover’s capability to assist astronauts with light,

-   test in-the-field rover control using portable antenna and sidearm
    joystick,

-   test radio communication procedures.

## Plant Growth on Eifel Regolith Simulant

In order to analyze growth rate in plants on regolith soil, 10 seeds of
cress Lepidium sativum (Superseeds, NL) per pot were planted in 4 copies
of subsequent soil types: 20 g of autoclaved (2h in 120°C) Eifel
regolith simulant soil (RA), 20 g of autoclaved Eifel regolith simulant
soil with 2 ml of nutrients (KNOP medium [@ref17]), (RAN), 20 g not
autoclaved Eifel regolith simulant soil (R), 10g of peat (S), 10 g of
autoclaved peat (SA). Lowered mass of peat (Potgrond universel, BVB
Gardening, NL), was used to obtain the same volume of soil in
experimental pots. 35 transparent pots were used in the experiment. 20
pots containing seeds, 4 pots per one soil type, and 15 blank pots only
with various types of used soils to control contamination processes, 3
pots per one soil type (Figure 3).

![Experimental setup for plant growth analysis on regolith simulant
Eifel soil. Left side with rows of cress: RA - autoclaved regolith, RAN
- autoclaved regolith with nutrients, R - regolith, SA - autoclaved
peat, S - peat. On the right side soil samples without plants to analyze
contamination effects during watering and cultivation period. Regolith
soil differs in color comparing to the dark peat.](img/figure03.png)

Two week long experiment was performed in a microharvester
(MicroHarvester V3, Germany), in 32°C with 12:12 L:D light/dark
conditions (12 hours lights on, 12 hours darkness). Every second day
plants were watered with 5 ml of distilled water. Growth rate analysis
was performed based on data collected in four subsequent days of the
fastest morphological plant transformation (5th, 6th, 7th and 8th day of
the experiment), by using imaging method. Images were processed and
measured in ImageJ Software. Obtained data was analyzed in Excel.

## Psychosocial investigation

Three EVAs were conducted always by two analogue astronauts with support
from mission control centre. Each EVA was performed by different
analogue astronauts of various professions (geologist, biologist,
engineer, psychologist etc.) and research focus as mentioned in section
3.2 Extravehicular Activities. Psychosocial aspects of the simulation
were investigated.

Research indicates that the relationship between astronaut crew and
mission control may be problematic [@ref21][@ref22]. From this reason
this psychosocial investigation included both - the astronauts as well
as the mission control personnel - mainly Capsule Communicator (CapCom).
Several methods were applied. Observation was conducted during the EVAs
and interviews with all analogue astronauts and Capsule Communicators
were performed in the post-simulation phase. The main intention of the
psychosocial research was to study communication.

Sociomapping method [@ref20][@ref23] was used to visualize the
interactions between analogue astronauts and CapCom. Sociomapping is an
psychodiagnostic method that enables visualisation of relations within a
team. The height of the sociomap reflects the intensity of a certain
aspect (in this case the quality communication). Colours vary from red
(the highest intensity) through yellow and green to dark blue (lowest
intensity). The position of individual elements (people) stands for the
position in the team and indicates the psychological proximity among
crewmembers [@ref20][@ref23]. Sociomaps were created by Socimapping
software [@ref20] and were based on the data collected as a part of the
interviews by using closed five point scale.

# Results

During the second EVA the crew performed a basic geological analysis of
the volcanic outcrop. The studied area was selected based on the good
variability and visibility of the layers with the objective to collect
samples with different characteristics. In this way it was possible to
obtain deeper information of all the outcrop with a secondary study
performed in laboratory.

The outcrop showed eruptive sequence formed by layers with
sub-horizontal stratigraphy composed by cinder deposits alternate to
cross laminations in some phyroclastic deposits, formed by pumice stone
with one to ten millimetre dimensions, where it was possible also
observe some accessory block (Figure 4). The characteristic mentioned
above suggest a past turbulent phyroclastic flux. The second crew of
astronauts selected samples from each layer using indication from the
mission control station. In the paragraph the results obtained after the
spectroscopy analyses are presented.

![In this figure we show the layers that we used to collect the samples.
In the image on the left it is possible to observe a detail of the
outcrop where phyroclastic and cinder deposits are alternated. In the
image on the right it is present one accessory block.](img/figure04.png)

## Field spectroscopy, imaging and sampling

Several spectroscopy measurements in the UV/VIS spectrum were performed
using a remotely controlled USB4000 spectrometer, during a field
campaign in the Eifel volcanic area in Germany. The data that was
obtained during the field measurements was compared to the data obtained
from laboratory analyses to determine the reliability of field
spectroscopy analyses. By determining the errors that can occur during
field measurements we hope to establish better conditions for field
spectroscopy and an improved calibration method to minimize errors for
future field measurements.

### In-situ results

Figure 5 shows the reference spectrum from the sample analysis and
Figure 6 shows the spectrum of one of the volcanic rocks that was
sampled during the field campaign. Figure 6 shows a number of anomalies
that are likely not caused by absorption bands from the sample. A high
reflection value around 760 nm and relatively more absorption around 430
nm and 590 nm are examples of such anomalies.

![The reference spectrum that was used to analyse the sample during the
field campaign.](img/figure05.png)

![The reflection of a volcanic sample from the Eifel volcanic area
measured during a Moon EVA.](img/figure06.png)

### Post campaign measurements

As stated before, sample measurements were conducted again in laboratory
conditions, after the campaign. The analyses were performed using the
the same spectrometer (USB4000), in a dark environment with
incandescence light source. This light source does not emit UV light and
it makes spectrum analysis below 400 nm impossible. Figure 7 shows the
reflection spectrum of the volcanic sample from the laboratory
measurement and from the field measurement. The integration time for the
laboratory measurements was 200 milliseconds and the final result was
generally an average of 20 measurements. A dark spectrum was measured
before each sequence and the reference spectrum was determined before
each measurement.

![The spectra of the volcanic rock that was sampled during the EVA and
measured with both field and laboratory analyses.](img/figure07.png)

When comparing the results from the field measurements it is visible
that the spectras differ from from each other. These differences can be
caused by changes in weather conditions or errors in the reference
spectrum. To determine the possible influence of the weather conditions
on the reference spectrum the spectrum of a sky during different weather
conditions were analysed. Figure 8 shows the spectra of the reference
spectrum from the field analyses and from a clouded and a clear sky,
which was analysed with an integration time of 300 ms, the spectrum of
direct sunlight which was measured with an integration time of 3.8 ms
and. There are clear differences visible between these spectra. For
example, the spectrum of the clear sky shows a high intensity in the
blue spectrum, which can be expected. However, all the spectra show
absorption bands that represent the Fraunhofer lines. These lines are
caused by absorption by for example oxygen (686 nm, 759 nm and 823 nm
nm), helium (588 nm) and hydrogen (410 nm, 434 nm, 486 nm and 656 nm,
also known as the Balmer lines)

Figure 9 shows the values from Figure 8 divided by the reference
spectrum from the EVA. By analyzing the difference between these spectra
and comparing it to the sample analyses it is possible to determine the
influence the weather conditions could have had on the sample analyses
during the EVA. A peak at 759 nm is visible in all the ratios and can
therefore probably be caused by weather conditions since it is caused by
the absorption by oxygen. Between 400 nm and 500 nm the measurement
during the EVA shows a high reflectance compared to the laboratory
analyses. This can partially be caused by less direct sunlight. However,
if a change of weather would have caused a disturbance in the spectrum
during EVA, a question that remains is why certain anomalies, such as an
increase at 686 nm, are not visible.

![The spectrum of different natural light sources and the reference
spectrum that was measured and used during the EVA.](img/figure08.png)

![The spectrum of different weather conditions compared to the spectrum
that was measured during the EVA and used as a reference
spectrum.](img/figure09.png)

We hope to improve the conditions for the measurements and create a
calibration method by being aware of the errors that can occur during
field spectroscopy analyses. Spectroscopy analyses in the UV/VIS
spectrum is limited in its practical use. However, being aware of the
problems that arise during field spectroscopy in UV/VIS spectrum can
also be taken into account during measurements in NIR and IR spectra.
The measurements will be repeated during a planned field experiment in
February 2017 to determine the changes in the spectrum by changing
parameters. By adding an extra light source near the spectrometer we
expect to improve the results from the spectroscopy analyses. This will
also make it possible to measure using a smaller integration time and a
higher scans to average to improve the result. Finally we will look at
the difference in using a white surface or the sky as reference
spectrum.

## Human/robotic partnership and rover operations results

During the EVAs, astronauts were supported by a mobile rover (shown on
Figure 1), built by the crew engineer from of-the-shelf components. It
is operated remotely with a joystick, via a WiFi network, from the
habitat (with visual feedback from an on board camera) or by one of the
astronauts (without the feedback). For two of three missions, the rover
was operated from the habitat. During the last mission, one of the
astronauts operated the rover from an arm mounted control panel. Both
ways have proved to be effective and efficient.

Before operations, it served as a survey device, which was deployed
before the EVA in order to find best sampling areas. During an EVA, the
rover was used as a sample storage and transport device, from the
sampling area to the lander or habitat, so astronauts could focus on
collecting samples, mobility and communication with MCC.

From the construction view, the rover is based on a 6WD Wild Thumper
[@ref27] all-terrain chassis, powered by a 5000 mAh Redox 2S LiPo
battery. Motors are driven by 2 Pololu 18v25 Motor Drivers [@ref26]. The
main computer, Raspberry Pi 3 model B [@ref25], runs Raspbian with Robot
Operating System framework [@ref24] for motor and camera control, and
WiFi communication with the operator. Such configuration allows
engineers working on the system for a lot of flexibility and provides
many development areas. The development of the rover was supported by
National Geographic.

Currently, a robotic arm is in development. It will allow the rover to
pick up samples and perform other tasks requiring manipulation. There
are works aiming to integrate additional sensing tools with with the
rover such as a GPS sensor for marking sampling areas, implementing
visual based 3D mapping technologies for creating a full 3D map of the
environment, magnetometer for measuring magnetic field anomalies in the
area, spectrometer for making in-situ measurements or even Geiger
counter for radiation level measurements. Also work is made to improve
the storage capabilities of the rover, so that it can also transport
various tools and meters for the astronauts. Additional work might be
done to assemble a deployable meteorological station to measure
temperature, pressure, humidity dust and wind.

## Morphological changes and diverse plant growth on the regolith simulant soils

Plant development depends on environmental factors such light, humidity
and temperature, seed quality, contaminations and soil type. In
laboratory conditions we could control all parameters, so observed
differences were only the effect of soil type and added nutrients. In
the 4th day of the experiment plants already emerged from seeds in
subsequent values: 60

![Imaging method used in the plant growth analysis. For each testing
sample lengths of plant stems were measured and standardized to the
imaged scale. Significant morphological changes were observed between
compared soil types. This images visualize 12 days old
cress.](img/figure10.png)

![Average stem length \[cm\] and average growth rate \[cm/day\] of cress
Lepidium sativum.](img/figure11.png)

In general, we observed that plant development was different in
different types of soil (Figure 10, 12). In particular, plants grown on
the regolith simulant have had thinner leaves and were shorter than the
plants grown on peak or regolith with nutrients (Figure 10, 12).
Interestingly, autoclaved peak (SA) was better for the plant development
than not autoclaved one (S). This suggests, that microorganisms living
in not autoclaved soil suppress plant development by evoking stress
responses. The growth process reached maximal value in the 6th day of
the experiment on regolith soil. The highest averaged growth rate 0.96
cm/day was observed for plants growing on the nutrient-enhanced regolith
simulant (RAN).

![9th days old cress on different types of soil: RA - autoclaved
regolith simulant, RAN - autoclaved regolith simulant with nutrients, R
- regolith simulant, SA - autoclaved peak, S - peak. Visible changes in
leaves and stem sizes. Characteristic T-shaped leaves in RA and R,
comparing to Umbrella-shaped nourished leaves in other
samples.](img/figure12.png)

Our studies revealed, that regolith simulant enriched with nutrients,
could be used for plant cultivation in space. More studies need to be
done to optimize the plant growth on regolith soil.

### Spectroscopy analyses

For this experiment we will focus on the visible spectrum of green
vegetation which is controlled by the presence of chlorophyll.
Chlorophyll can be found in algae and plants and is necessary for
photosynthesis and gives these organisms their green colour. This is the
result of the fact that chlorophyll mainly absorbs light from the blue
and red areas of the electromagnetic spectrum and absorbs poorly from
the green spectrum, which results in the green colour of chlorophyll.
There are roughly two types of chlorophyll: chlorophyll a and b. The
exact absorption of chlorophyll is difficult to measure precisely since
the spectrum can be influenced by the extraction method, the solvent and
the spectrometer. Chlorophyll a absorbs between 428 and 432 nm and 660
and 665 nm, chlorophyll b absorbs between 452 and 469 nm and between 642
and 652 nm.

Figure 13 shows the results from spectroscopy analyses performed on the
last day of the experiment (21st day cress). At the moment of the
measurements, a lot of plants did already started to dry out. This is
also visible in the spectra of these plants. An example is measurement
R3 which shows less absorption in the blue and red area compared to the
green spectrum. To determine the difference in absorption two ratios
were calculated. This ratio is based on the lowest reflectance value
between 460 and 540 nm (Minimum 1) and between 620 and 700 nm (Minimum
2), and the highest reflection between 530 nm and 580 nm (Maximum 1) and
between 700 and 770 nm (Maximum 2). Figure 14 shows the ratio of these
samples from the beginning (the 8th day) and the end (the 21 day) of the
experiment. There is a clear distinction between the measurements on the
beginning of the experiments and the measurements at the end of the
experiment. This can be caused by drying of the plants, which results in
less absorption and reflection of chlorophyll.

![The spectrum of the leafs from the plant
experiment.](img/figure13.png)

![The ratios of the maximum and minimum values measured during the 8th
day (...-1) and 21st day of the experiment (...-2). A clear division is
visible between these two moments of analyses.](img/figure14.png)

## Psychosocial investigation

Astronauts as well as mission control personnel were observed during the
EVAs and interviewed in the post-simulation phase.

### Sociomapping

Sociomaps were created by Sociomapping software [@ref20]. There are
three sociomaps (Figures 15-17) presented - one from each EVA. These
sociomaps visualize the quality of communication among astronauts and
CapCom. The visualization was created from collected data, based on
subjective evaluation of participants.

The sociomap of the first EVA (Figure 15) shows very close
communicational relationship of two astronauts and very high quality of
the the communication (evaluated as “always above average”) between
those two individuals. CapCom is distant, marked with light blue
indicating rather low quality of communication which was evaluated by
astronauts between “sufficient” and “should sometimes be better”.

![The sociomap of the quality of communication of the first EVA
team.](img/figure15.png)

The sociomap of the second EVA also visualizes CapCom in the position
that is far away from the astronauts even though the communication
quality of CapCom was evaluated as sufficient. The quality of
communication between astronauts and CapCom was low which could be
caused by technical problems as described below.

![The sociomap of the quality of communication of the second EVA
team.](img/figure16.png)

The sociomap of third EVA shows very high quality of communication. The
cohesion of the team is high and includes CapCom. Overall communication
quality of this EVA was above average.

![The sociomap of the quality of communication of the third EVA
team.](img/figure17.png)

### Technical issues of communication

Evaluation of technical aspects of communication was conducted as a part
of the interviews. All astronauts and CapComs have evaluated on the
scale from 1 (very bad) to 5 (very good, no problems) how the technical
aspects of the communication during their EVA influenced the quality of
communication. Figures 18-20 reflects the evaluation of two astronauts
and CapCom of certain EVA.

![The evaluation of the technical aspects of communication of the first
EVA.](img/figure18.png)

![The evaluation of the technical aspects of communication of the second
EVA.](img/figure19.png)

![The evaluation of the technical aspects of communication of the third
EVA.](img/figure20.png)

Results show correlation with results obtained from sociomaps (Figures
15-17). The most problematic in the scope of the technical aspects was
the second EVA (Figure 19) which was also associated with the lowest
communication quality among individuals (Figure 16). Due to those
technical issues, the astronauts during the second EVA have missed the
emergency call from mission control. The highest communication quality
among participants as well as relatively positively evaluated technical
aspects of communication are visible in graph of the third EVA (Figure
17, 20).

### Astronaut’s feelings

Analogue astronauts were individually interviewed and asked about their
feelings regarding the status of analogue astronaut (“How did you feel
as an astronaut?”) and emotions during an EVA (“Could you describe your
emotions during the EVA?”). Three out of six astronauts mentioned that
they were stressed, especially in the beginning of their EVA. Three out
of six astronauts mentioned high excitement connected to the being an
astronaut. Other positive statements such as “fun”, “nice work”,
“pleasant” etc. were expressed by four out of six astronauts.

Next part of the interviews has focused on perceived difficulties (“What
difficulties did you have to face? And what challenges you had to
overcome?”). The answers were mainly connected to the specific tasks of
each individual except the difficulties caused by helmet and gloves
which were mentioned by two astronauts.

Astronauts was also asked to rate their work done during EVAs on five
point scale: 1 (very bad) to 5 (excellent). The ratings varied just from
2 to 4. CapComs also rated the work of the astronauts. However, their
ratings were more positive and ranged from 4 to 5.

# Analog Extravehicular Activity operational issues

During EVA scenarios, the team was able to identify several issues. Most
of those issues were connected with communication and mission
organization. The problems have been reported and elaborated upon to
create a lessons learned article. Here’s the list of the improvements
astronauts team must introduce before the next simulation.

## Communication

-   train astronauts with radio communication,

-   establish common communication language,

-   introduce common linguo and alphabet,

-   pre-established radio callsigns and callouts,

-   establish protocol for emergency calls,

-   introduce radio communication culture,

-   introduce protocol for lost communication,

-   train crew to communicate intentions before activity,

-   simplify the emergency procedures,

-   investigate problems with radio communication hardware.

## Mission Organization

-   improve EVA scenarios,

-   make the general mission objectives more clear,

-   train more people in lander and onboard hardware assembly,

-   introduce inventory system and keep your workspace clean culture,

-   prevent chaos with spontaneously happen,

-   introduce segregated compartments with tools and spare parts,

-   log EVA events, timelines, informations,

-   keep more organized notes or use IT system support,

-   introduce briefings and debriefing.

## Extravehicular Activity

-   create a pre-EVA checklist: rock hammer, sample bags, size
    comparison marker, suit stuff, lightning,

-   create a procedure for taking pre- and post-EVA medical
    measurements,

-   maintain in-habitat culture while EVA is in progress,

-   shorten the pre-EVA procedure,

-   introduce a culture to work in pairs (leading EV1 and supporting
    EV2),

-   document in more detailed manner the field and sample before
    performing a tasks,

-   keep order in things and place things up in the proper places,

-   introduce on arm checklist,

-   introduce event logging for the habitat crew.

# Lessons learned

## Wrap-up session

After the simulation crew has been participating in the wrap-up session,
in which the following talks were delivered:

-   Status Moon Village activities update (B. Foing),

-   Spaceship EAC update (A. Cowley),

-   MoonMars Base Simulation (A Kolodziejczyk),

-   1year at HiSeas Mars and MAMBA MoonMarsBase project (C. Heinicke),

-   MoonWalk (I. Schlacht/J. Rittweger/C. Inellioglu),

-   Lunar EVA simulations (M. Harasymczuk),

-   MoonMars Simulation Psychology studies (L. Davidova),

-   Material and 3D printing studies (EAC),

-   Collecting and analysing samples with robots and astronauts (M.
    Mirino),

-   MoonMars analogue sample spectro demo (H. Vos),

-   Virtual reality Model study of lunar polar illumination (A. Casini),

-   Sending robots to space (M. Krainski),

-   Virtual Reality Simulation Game at MoonVillage (E. Tomozei),

-   presentation by Spaceship EAC students,

-   report from ESTEC workshop & Eifel field study.

# Acknowledgements

We thank participants and collaborators for the ILEWG EuroMoonMars Dec
2016 campaign at the Eifel and National Geographic for support in
building the rover.

# Bibliography
